DEFINING DATA MINING THE WEB
By data mining the Web, we refer to the application of data mining methodologies,
techniques, and models to the variety of data forms, structures, and usage patterns
that comprise the World Wide Web. As the subtitle indicates, we are interested in
uncovering patterns and trends in the content, structure, and use of the Web. A good
definition of data mining is that in Principles of Data Mining by David Hand, Heikki
Mannila, and Padhraic Smyth (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2001): “Data mining is
the analysis of (often large) observational data sets to find unsuspected relationships
and to summarize the data in novelways that are both understandable and useful to the
data owner.” Data Mining the Web: Uncovering Patterns in Web Content, Structure,
and Usage demonstrates how to apply data mining methods and models toWeb-based
data forms.
THE DATA MINING BOOK SERIES
This book represents the third volume in a data mining book series. The first volume
in this series, Discovering Knowledge in Data: An Introduction to Data Mining, by
Daniel Larose, appeared in 2005, and introduced the reader to this rapidly growing
field of data mining. The second volume in the series, Data Mining Methods and
Models, by Daniel Larose, appeared in 2006, and explores the process of data mining
from the point of view of model building—the development of complex and powerful
predictive models that can deliver actionable results for a wide range of business
and research problems. Although Data Mining the Web: Uncovering Patterns in Web
Content, Structure, and Usage serves well as a stand-alone resource for learning how
to apply data mining techniques to Web-based data, reference is sometimes made to
more complete coverage of certain topics in the earlier volumes.
HOW THE BOOK IS STRUCTURED
The book is presented in three parts.
Part I: Web Structure Mining
In Part I we discuss basic ideas and techniques for extracting text information from the
Web, including collecting and indexing web documents and searching and ranking
xi
xii PREFACE
web pages by their textual content and hyperlink structure. Part I contains two chapters,
Chapter 1, Information Retrieval and Web Search; and Chapter 2, Hyperlink-Based
Ranking.
Part II: Web Content Mining
Machine learning and data mining approaches organize the Web by content and thus
respond directly to the major challenge of turning web data into web knowledge. InPart
IIwefocus on two approaches to organizing theWeb, clustering and classification. Part
II consists of three chapters: Chapter 3, Clustering; Chapter 4, Evaluating Clustering;
and Chapter 5, Classification.
Part III: Web Usage Mining
Web usage mining refers to the application of data mining methods for uncovering
usage patterns from Web data. Web usage mining differs from web structure mining
and web content mining in that web usage mining reflects the behavior of humans as
they interact with the Internet. Part III consists of four chapters: Chapters 6, Introduction
to Web Usage Mining; Chapter 7, Preprocessing for Web Usage Mining; Chapter
8, Exploratory Data Analysis for Web Usage Mining; and Chapter 9, Modeling for
Web Usage Mining: Clustering, Association, and Classification.
WHY THE BOOK IS NEEDED
The book provides the reader with:
 The models and techniques to uncover hidden nuggets of information in Webbased
data
 Insight into how web mining algorithms really work
 The experience of actually performing web mining on real-world data sets
“WHITE-BOX” APPROACH: UNDERSTANDING
THE UNDERLYING ALGORITHMIC AND
MODEL STRUCTURES
The best way to avoid costly errors stemming from a blind black-box approach to data
mining, is to apply, instead, a white-box methodology, which emphasizes an understanding
of the algorithmic and statistical model structures underlying the software.
The book, applies this white-box approach by:
 Walking the reader through various algorithms
 Providing examples of the operation of web mining algorithms on actual large
data sets
PREFACE xiii
 Testing the reader’s level of understanding of the concepts and algorithms
 Providing an opportunity for the reader to do some real web mining on large
Web-based data sets
AlgorithmWalk-Throughs
The book walks the reader through the operations and nuances of various algorithms,
using small sample data sets, so that the reader gets a true appreciation of what is
really going on inside an algorithm. For example, in Chapter 1, we demonstrate the
nuts and bolts of relevance ranking, similarity searching, and other topics, using a
particular small web data set. The reader can perform the same analysis in parallel,
and therefore understanding is enhanced.
Applications of Algorithms and Models to Large Data Sets
The book provides examples of the application of the various algorithms and models
on actual large data sets. For example, in Chapter 7 data cleaning, de-spidering,
session identification, and other tasks are carried out on two real-world large web log
databases, from the Web sites for NASA and Central Connecticut State University.
All data sets used throughout the book are available for free download from the book
series Web site, www.dataminingconsultant.com.
Chapter Exercises: Checking to Make Sure That You
Understand It
The book includes over 100 chapter exercises, which allow readers to assess their
depth of understanding of the material, as well as to have a little fun playing with
numbers and data. These include exercises designed to (1) clarify some of the more
challenging concepts in data mining, and (2) challenge the reader to apply the particular
data mining algorithm to a small data set and, step by step, to arrive at a
computationally sound solution. For example, in Chapter 4 readers are asked to run
a series of experiments comparing the efficacy of a variety of clustering algorithms
applied to the “Top 100 Websites” data set.
Hands-on Analysis: Learn Data Mining by Doing Data Mining
Nearly every chapter provides the reader with hands-on analysis problems, representing
an opportunity for the reader to apply his or her newly acquired data mining
expertise to solving real problems using large data sets. Many people learn by doing.
The book provides a framework by which the reader can learn data mining by doing
data mining. For example, in Chapter 8 readers are challenged to provide detailed
reports and summaries for real-world web log data. The 34 tasks include finding
the average time per page view, constructing a table of the most popular directories,
and so on.
xiv PREFACE
DATA MINING AS A PROCESS
The book continues the coverage of data mining as a process. The particular standard
process used is the CRISP-DM framework: the cross-industry standard process for
data mining. CRISP-DM demands that data mining be seen as an entire process, from
communication of the business problem through data collection and management,
data preprocessing, model building, model evaluation, and finally, model deployment.
Therefore, this book is not only for analysts and managers, but also for data
management professionals, database analysts, decision makers, and others whowould
like to leverage their repositories of Web-based data.
THE SOFTWARE
The software used in this book includes the following:
 WEKA open-source data mining software
 Clementine data mining software suite.
The Weka (Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis) machine learning
workbench is open-source software issued under the GNU General Public
License, which includes a collection of tools for completing many data mining
tasks. The book uses Weka throughout Parts I and II. For more information
regarding Weka, see http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/~ml/. Clementine
(http://www.spss.com/clementine/) is one of the most widely used data mining
software suites and is distributed by SPSS. Clementine is used throughout Part
III.
THE COMPANION WEB SITE:
www.dataminingconsultant.com
The reader will find supporting materials for both this book and the
other data mining books in this series at the companion Web site,
www.dataminingconsultant.com. There one may download the many data sets
used in the book, so that the reader may develop a hands-on feeling for the analytic
methods and models encountered throughout the book. Errata are also available, as
is a comprehensive set of data mining resources, including links to data sets, data
mining groups, and research papers.
The real power of the companion Web site is available to faculty adopters of
the textbook, who will have access to the following resources:
 Solutions to all the exercises, including hands-on analyses
 Powerpoint presentations of each chapter, ready for deployment in the classroom
PREFACE xv
 Sample data mining course projects, written by the authors for use in their own
courses, and ready to be adapted for your course
 Real-world data sets, to be used with the course projects.
 Multiple-choice chapter quizzes
 Chapter-by-chapter web resources
DATA MINING THE WEB AS A TEXTBOOK
The book naturally fits the role of a textbook for an introductory course in web mining.
Instructors may appreciate:
 The “white-box” approach, emphasizing an understanding of the underlying
algorithmic structures
? Algorithm walk-throughs
? Application of the algorithms to large data sets
? Chapter exercises
? Hands-on analysis
 The logical presentation, flowing naturally from the CRISP-DM standard process
and the set of web mining tasks
 The companionWeb site, providing the array of resources for adopters detailed
above
The book is appropriate for advanced undergraduate or graduate-level courses.
An introductory statistics coursewould be nice, but is not required. No prior computer
programming or database expertise is required.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The material for web content and structure mining is based on the web mining course
that I developed and taught for the graduate CIT program at Central Connecticut
State University. The student projects and some exercises from this course were then
used in the artificial intelligence course that I taught for the CS program at the same
school. Some material from my data mining and machine learning courses taught for
the data mining program at CCSU is also included. I am grateful to my students from
all these courses for their inspirational enthusiasm and valuable feedback. The book
was written while I was on sabbatical leave, spent in my home country, Bulgaria,
sharing my time between family and writing. I wish to thank my children, Teodora
and Kalin, and my wife, Irena, for their patience and understanding during that time.
Zdravko Markov, Ph.D.
Department of Computer Science
Central Connecticut State University
www.cs.ccsu.edu/~markov/
xvi PREFACE
I would like to thank all the folks at Wiley, especially editor Paul Petralia,
for their guidance and support. Je suis ´egalement reconnaissant `a ma r´edactrice
et amie Val Moliere, qui a insist´e pour que cette s´erie de livres devienne r´ealit´e.
I also wish to thank Dr. Chun Jin, Dr. Daniel S. Miller, Dr. Roger Bilisoly, Dr. Darius
Dziuda, and Dr. Krishna Saha, my colleagues in the Master of Science in data mining
program at Central Connecticut State University, Dr. Timothy Craine, Chair of
the Department of Mathematical Sciences at CCSU, Dr. Dipak K. Dey, Chair of the
Department of Statistics at the University of Connecticut, and Dr. John Judge, Chair
of the Department of Mathematics atWestfield State College. Thanks to my daughter,
Chantal, for her precious love and gentle insanity. Thanks to my twin children, Tristan
and Ravel, for sharing the computer and for sharing their true perspective. Above all,
I extend my deepest gratitude to my darling wife, Debra J. Larose, for her support,
understanding, and love. “Say you’ll share with me one love, one lifetime. . . .”
Daniel T. Larose, Ph.D.
Professor of Statistics
Director, Data Mining @CCSU
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Central Connecticut State University
www.math.ccsu.edu/larose