Preface
Since its definition a decade ago, the problem of mining patterns is becoming a very active research
area, and efficient techniques have been widely applied to problems either in industry, government or
science. From the initial definition and motivated by real applications, the problem of mining patterns
not only addresses the finding of itemsets but also more and more complex patterns. For instance, new
approaches need to be defined for mining graphs or trees in applications dealing with complex data such
as XML documents, correlated alarms or biological networks. As the number of digital data are always
growing, the problem of the efficiency of mining such patterns becomes more and more attractive.
One of the first areas dealing with a large collection of digital data is probably text mining. It aims at
analyzing large collections of unstructured documents with the purpose of extracting interesting, relevant
and nontrivial knowledge. However, patterns became more and more complex, and led to open problems.
For instance, in the biological networks context, we have to deal with common patterns of cellular interactions,
organization of functional modules, relationships and interaction between sequences, and patterns
of genes regulation. In the same way, multidimensional pattern mining has also been defined, and a lot
of open questions remain regarding the size of the search space or to effectiveness consideration. If we
consider social network in the Internet, we would like to better understand and measure relationships
and flows between people, groups and organizations. Many real-world applications data are no longer
appropriately handled by traditional static databases since data arrive sequentially in rapid, continuous
streams. Since data-streams are contiguous, high speed and unbounded, it is impossible to mine patterns
by using traditional algorithms requiring multiple scans and new approaches have to be proposed.
In order to efficiently aid decision making, and for effectiveness consideration, constraints become
more and more essential in many applications. Indeed, an unconstrained mining can produce such a large
number of patterns that it may be intractable in some domains. Furthermore, the growing consensus that
the end user is no more interested by a set patterns verifying selection criteria led to demand for novel
strategies for extracting useful, even approximate knowledge.
The goal of this book is to provide an overall view of the existing solutions for mining new kinds of
patterns. It aims at providing theoretical frameworks and presenting challenges and possible solutions
concerning pattern extraction with an emphasis on both research techniques and real-world applications.
It is composed of 11 chapters.
Often data mining problems require metric techniques defined on the set of partitions of finite sets
(e.g., classification, clustering, data preparation). The chapter “Metric Methods in Data Mining” proposed
by D. A. Simovici addresses this topic. Initially proposed by R. López de Màntaras, these techniques
formulate a novel splitting criterion that yields better results than the classical entropy gain splitting
techniques. In this chapter, Simovici investigates a family of metrics on the set of partitions of finite
sets that is linked to the notion of generalized entropy. The efficiency of this approach is proved through
experiments conducted for different data mining tasks: classification, clustering, feature extraction and
discretization. For each approach the most suitable metrics are proposed.
xi
Mining patterns from a dataset always rely on a crucial point: the interest criterion of the patterns.
Literature mostly proposes the minimum support as a criterion; however, interestingness may occur in
constraints applied to the patterns or the strength of the correlation between the items of a pattern, for
instance. The next two chapters deal with these criteria.
In “Bidirectional Constraint Pushing in Frequent Pattern Mining” by O.R. Zaïane and M. El-Hajj,
proposes consideration of the problem of mining constrained patterns. Their challenge is to obtain a
sheer number of rules, rather than the very large set of rules usually resulting from a mining process.
First, in a survey of constraints in data mining (which covers both definitions and methods) they show
how the previous methods can generally be divided into two sets. Methods from the first set consider the
monotone constraint during the mining, whereas methods from the second one consider the antimonotone
constraint. The main idea, in this chapter, is to consider both constraints (monotone and antimonotone)
early in the mining process. The proposed algorithm (BifoldLeap) is based on this principle and allows
an efficient and effective extraction of constrained patterns. Finally, parallelization of BifolLeap is also
proposed in this chapter. The authors thus provide the reader with a very instructive chapter on constraints
in data mining, from the definitions of the problem to the proposal, implementation and evaluation of
an efficient solution.
Another criterion for measuring the interestingness of a pattern may be the correlation between the
items it contains. Highly correlated patterns are named “Hyperclique Patterns” in the chapter of H. Xiong,
P. N. Tan, V. Kumar and W. Zhou entitled “Mining Hyperclique Patterns: A Summary of Results”. The
chapter provides the following observation: when the minimum support in a pattern mining process is
too low, then the number of extracted itemsets is very high. A thorough analysis of the patterns will often
show patterns that are poorly correlated (i.e., involving items having very different supports). Those
patterns may then be considered as spurious patterns. In this chapter, the authors propose the definition
of hyperclique patterns. Those patterns contain items that have similar threshold. They also give the
definition of the h-confidence. Then, h-confidence is analyzed for properties that will be interesting in a
data mining process: antimonotone, cross-support and a measure of association. All those properties will
help in defining their algorithm: hyperclique miner. After having evaluated their proposal, the authors
finally give an application of hyperclique patterns for identifying protein functional modules.
This book is devoted to provide new and useful material for pattern mining. Both methods aforementioned
are presented in the first chapters in which they focus on their efficiency. In that way, this
book reaches part of the goal. However, we also wanted to show strong links between the methods and
their applications. Biology is one of the most promising domains. In fact, it has been widely addressed
by researchers in data mining those past few years and still has many open problems to offer (and to be
defined). The next two chapters deal with bioinformatics and pattern mining.
Biological data (and associated data mining methods) are at the core of the chapter entitled “Pattern
Discovery in Biosequences: From Simple to Complex Patterns” by S. Rombo and L. Palopoli. More
precisely, the authors focus on biological sequences (e.g., DNA or protein sequences) and pattern extraction
from those sequences. They propose a survey on existing techniques for this purpose through
a synthetic formalization of the problem. This effort will ease reading and understanding the presented
material. Their chapter first gives an overview on biological datasets involving sequences such as DNA
or protein sequences. The basic notions on biological data are actually given in the introduction of this
chapter. Then, an emphasis on the importance of patterns in such data is provided. Most necessary notions
for tackling the problem of mining patterns from biological sequential data are given: definitions
of the problems, existing solutions (based on tries, suffix trees), successful applications as well as future
trends in that domain.
An interesting usage of patterns relies in their visualization. In this chapter, G. Leban, M. Mramor,
B. Zupan, J. Demsar and I. Bratko propose to focus on “Finding Patterns in Class-labeled Data Using
xii
Data Visualization.” The first contribution of their chapter is to provide a new visualization method for
extracting knowledge from data. WizRank, the proposed method, can search for interesting multidimensional
visualizations of class-labeled data. In this work, the interestingness is based on how well
instances of different classes are separated. A large part of this chapter will be devoted to experiments
conducted on gene expression datasets, obtained by the use of DNA microarray technology. Their experiments
show simple visualizations that clearly visually differentiate among cancer types for cancer
gene expression data sets.
Multidimensional databases are data repositories that are becoming more and more important
and strategic in most of the main companies. However, mining these particular databases
is a challenging issue that has not yet received relevant answers. This is due to the fact
that multidimensional databases generally contain huge volumes of data stored according
to particular structures called star schemas that are not taken into account in most popular
data mining techniques. Thus, when facing these databases, users are not provided with useful
tools to help them discovering relevant parts. Consequently, users still have to navigate manually
in the data, that is—using the OLAP operators—users have to write sophisticated queries.
One important task for discovering relevant parts of a multidimensional database is to identify homogeneous
parts that can summarize the whole database. In the chapter “Summarizing Data Cubes Using
Blocks,” Y. W. Choong, A. Laurent and D. Laurent propose original and scalable methods to mine the
main homogeneous patterns of a multidimensional database. These patterns, called blocks, are defined
according to the corresponding star schema and thus, provide relevant summaries of a given multidimensional
database. Moreover, fuzziness is introduced in order to mine for more accurate knowledge
that fits users’ expectations.
The first social networking website began in 1995 (i.e., classmates). Due to the development of the
Internet, the number of social networks grew exponentially. In order to better understand and measuring
relationships and flows between people, groups and organizations, new data mining techniques, called
social network mining, appear. Usually social network considers that nodes are the individual actors
within the networks, and ties are the relationships between the actors. Of course, there can be many kinds
of ties between the nodes and mining techniques try to extract knowledge from these ties and nodes. In
the chapter “Social Network Mining from the Web,” Y. Matsuo, J. Mori and M. Ishizuka address this
problem and show that Web search engine are very useful in order to extract social network. They first
address basic algorithms initially defined to extract social network. Even if the social network can be
extracted, one of the challenging problems is how to analyze this network. This presentation illustrates
that even if the search engine is very helpful, a lot of problems remain, and they also discuss the literature
advances. They focus on the centrality of each actor of the network and illustrate various applications
using a social network.
Text-mining approaches first surfaced in the mid-1980s, but thanks to technological advances it has
been received a great deal of attention during the past decade. It consists in analyzing large collections
of unstructured documents for the purpose of extracting interesting, relevant and nontrivial knowledge.
Typical text mining tasks include text categorization (i.e., in order to classify document collection into
a given set of classes), text clustering, concept links extraction, document summarization and trends
detection.
The following three chapters address the problem of extracting knowledge from large collections of
documents. In the chapter “Discovering Spatio-Textual Association Rules in Document Images”, M.
Berardi, M. Ceci and D. Malerba consider that, very often, electronic documents are not always available
and then extraction of useful knowledge should be performed on document images acquired by
scanning the original paper documents (document image mining). While text mining focuses on patterns
xiii
involving words, sentences and concepts, the purpose of document image mining is to extract high-level
spatial objects and relationships. In this chapter they introduce a new approach, called WISDOM++, for
processing documents and transform documents into XML format. Then they investigate the discovery
of spatio-textual association rules that takes into account both the layout and the textual dimension on
XML documents. In order to deal with the inherent spatial nature of the layout structure, they formulate
the problem as multi-level relational association rule mining and extend a spatial rule miner SPADA
(spatial pattern discovery algorithm) in order to cope with spatio-textual association rules. They show
that discovered patterns could also be used both for classification tasks and to support layout correction
tasks.
L. Candillier, L. Dunoyer, P. Gallinari, M.-C. Rousset, A. Termier and A. M. Vercoustre, in “Mining
XML Documents,” also consider an XML representation, but they mainly focus on the structure of the
documents rather than the content. They consider that XML documents are usually modeled as ordered
trees, which are regarded as complex structures. They address three mining tasks: frequent pattern extraction,
classification and clustering. In order to efficiently perform these tasks they propose various
tree-based representations. Extracting patterns in a large database is very challenging since we have to
consider the two following problems: a fast execution and we would like to avoid a memory-consuming
algorithm. When considering tree patterns the problem is much more challenging due to the size of
the research space. In this chapter they propose an overview of the best algorithms. Various approaches
to XML document classification and clustering are also proposed. As the efficiency of the algorithms
depends on the representation, they propose different XML representations based on structure, or both
structure and content. They show how decision-trees, probabilistic models, k-means and Bayesian networks
can be used to extract knowledge from XML documents.
In the chapter “Topic and Cluster Evolution Over Noisy Document Streams,” S. Schulz, M. Spiliopoulou
and R. Schult also consider text mining but in a different context: a stream of documents. They mainly
focus on the evolution of different topics when documents are available over streams. As previously stated,
one of the important purpose in text mining is the identification of trends in texts. Discover emerging
topics is one of the problems of trend detection. In this chapter, they discuss the literature advances on
evolving topics and on evolving clusters and propose a generic framework for cluster change evolution.
However discussed approaches do not consider non-noisy documents. The authors propose a new
approach that puts emphasis on small and noisy documents and extend their generic framework. While
cluster evolutions assume a static trajectory, they use a set-theoretic notion of overlap between old and
new clusters. Furthermore the framework extension consider both a document model describing a text
with a vector of words and a vector of n-gram, and a visualization tool used to show emerging topics.
In a certain way, C. J. Joutard, E. M. Airoldi, S. E. Fienberg and T. M. Love also address the analysis
of documents in the chapter “Discovery of Latent Patterns with Hierarchical Bayesian Mixed-Membership
Models and the Issue of Model Choice.” But in this chapter, the collection of papers published in
the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences is used in order to illustrate the issue of model
choice (e.g., the choice of the number of groups or clusters). They show that even if statistical models
involving a latent structure support data mining tasks, alternative models may lead to contrasting conclusions.
In this chapter they deal with hierarchical Bayesian mixed-membership models (HBMMM), that
is, a general formulation of mixed-membership models, which are a class of models very well adapted
for unsupervised data mining methods and investigate the issue of model choice in that context. They
discuss various existing strategies and propose new model specifications as well as different strategies
of model choice in order to extract good models. In order to illustrate, they consider both analysis of
documents and disability survey data.