Data mining is getting more and more attention in today’s business organizations.
You may often hear people saying, “we should segment our customers
using data mining tools,” “data mining will increase customer satisfaction,” or
even “our competitors are using data mining to gain market share — we
need to catch up!”
So, what is data mining and what benefits will using it bring you? How can
you leverage this technology to solve your daily business problems? What are
the technologies behind data mining? What is the life cycle of a typical data
mining project? In this chapter, we will answer all these questions and give
you an extended introduction to the data mining world.
In this chapter, you will learn about:
A definition of data mining
Determining which business problems can be solved with data mining
Data mining tasks
Using various data mining techniques
Data mining flow
The data mining project life cycle
Current data mining standards
A few new trends in data mining
Introduction to
Data Mining
CHAPTER 1
What Is Data Mining
Data mining is a key member in the Business Intelligence (BI) product family,
together with Online Analytical Processing (OLAP), enterprise reporting
and ETL.
Data mining is about analyzing data and finding hidden patterns using automatic
or semiautomatic means. During the past decade, large volumes of data
have been accumulated and stored in databases. Much of this data comes from
business software, such as financial applications, Enterprise Resource Management
(ERP), Customer Relationship Management (CRM), and Web logs. The
result of this data collection is that organizations have become data-rich and
knowledge-poor. The collections of data have become so vast and are increasing
so rapidly in size that the practical use of these stores of data has become
limited. The main purpose of data mining is to extract patterns from the data at
hand, increase its intrinsic value and transfer the data to knowledge.
You may wonder, why can’t we dig out the knowledge by using SQL queries?
In other words, you may wonder what the fundamental differences between
data mining and relational database technologies are. Let’s have a look of the following
example.
Figure 1.1 displays a relational table containing a list of high school graduates.
The table records information such as gender, IQ, the level of parental
encouragement, and the parental income of each student along with that student’s
intention to attend college. Someone asks you a question: What drives
high school graduates to attend college?
You may write a query to find out how many male students attend college
versus how many female students do. You may also write a query to determine
the impact of the Parent Encouragement column. But what about male students
who are encouraged by their parents? Or female students who are not encouraged
by their parents? You would need to write hundreds of these queries to
cover all the possible combinations. Data in numerical forms, such as that in Parent
Income or IQ, is even more difficult to analyze. You would need to choose
arbitrary ranges in these numeric values. What if there are hundreds of columns
in your table? You would quickly end up with an impossible to manage number
of SQL queries to answer a basic question about the meaning of your data.
In contrast, the data mining approach to this question is rather simple. All
you need to do is select the right data mining algorithm and specify the column
usage, meaning the input columns and the predictable columns (which
are the targets for the analysis). A decision tree model would work well to
determine the importance of parental encouragement in a student’s decision
to continue to college. You would select IQ, Gender, Parent Income, and Parent
Encouragement as the input columns and College Plans as the predictable column.
As the decision tree algorithm scans the data, it analyzes the impact of
2 Chapter 1
each input attribute related to the target and selects the most significant
attribute to split. Each split divides the dataset into two subsets so that the
value distribution of CollegePlans is as different as possible among these two
subsets. This process is repeated recursively on each subset until the tree is
completely built. Once the training process is complete, you can view the discovered
patterns by browsing the tree.
Figure 1.2 shows a decision tree for the College Plan dataset. Each path from
the root node to a leaf node forms a rule. Now, we can say that students with
an IQ greater than 100 and who are encouraged by their parents have a 94%
probability of attending college. We have extracted knowledge from the data.
As exemplified in Figure 1.2, data mining applies algorithms, such as decision
trees, clustering, association, time series, and so on, to a dataset and analyzes its
contents. This analysis produces patterns, which can be explored for valuable
information. Depending on the underlying algorithm, these patterns can be in
the form of trees, rules, clusters, or simply a set of mathematical formulas. The
information found in the patterns can be used for reporting, as a guide to marketing
strategies, and, most importantly, for prediction. For example, based on
the rules produced by the previous decision tree, you can predict with significant
accuracy whether high school students who are not represented in the original
dataset will attend college.